\input texinfo

@node Top
@top Grand LilyPond Input Syntax Standardization (GLISS)
@settitle LilyPond GLISS

@macro late{TEXT}
@cartouche
@strong{Addition after "probable decision":} \TEXT\

@end cartouche

@end macro

@macro qq{TEXT}
@quotedblleft{}\TEXT\@quotedblright{}
@end macro



More background is here:
@uref{http://lilypond.org/doc/v2.15/Documentation/contributor/grand-lilypond-input-syntax-standardization-_0028gliss_0029}

@subheading Meta-policies

To summarize and/or hopefully avoid useless fluffy discussions:

@itemize
@item
Topics will be introduced by Graham.  He will put an agenda for
the next month (or so) on @uref{http://lilypond.org/~graham/gliss/}

@item
We will @strong{only} seriously discuss topics when we have
adequate background research.

@item
Emails about policy questions will begin with @code{GLISS} in
the subject line.  Adjust your email filters accordingly,
depending on whether you are interested or not in such
discussions.

@item
There should be no surprises, no time pressure, etc.  If you are
particularly concerned about a decision but lack time/energy to
join the discussion, just say so and we will postponed the
decision.  I want to have clear, final, unambiguous decisions; if
that takes a long time, so be it.

@item
For each policy question, there will be at least @strong{one week}
for free-ranging discussion.  At that point, Graham will summarize
the discussion and announce a "probable decision".  We will then
have @strong{one more week} to let people point out flaws in the
summary, make additional arguments, etc.

@end itemize


@subheading Agenda

@multitable @columnfractions .05 .2 .2 .2
@headitem Date
  @tab Introduce question (-1d)
  @tab Summary and @qq{probable decision} (0d)
  @tab Implement decision (+1d)

@item
@tab
@tab @tab

@item
@tab
@tab
@tab

@item
@tab
@tab
@tab

@item
@tab
@tab
@tab


@end multitable


@menu
* GLISS 1 - basic input format::
* GLISS 2 - note-name languages::
* GLISS 3 - canonical file structure::
@end menu


@node GLISS 1 - basic input format
@chapter GLISS 1 - basic input format

@subheading Summary

Nothing special here: ly files will remain UTF-8, with all
commands using 7-bit ASCII.


@subheading Details

We obviously want to allow UTF-8 for lyrics, markup text, titles,
etc.  However, the basic lilypond commands (like @code{\repeat})
should be drawn from non-whitespace ASCII printable characters (33
to 126 inclusive), with additional whitespace characters from 0-31
as appropriate.

@subheading Exceptions

I would be really nice if we we could disallow ASCII char 60, the
back-quote @code{`}, since it is too easily confused with ASCII 47
@code{'}.  Is there any way to use a different character for this?

Other languages for note names may use any UTF-8 characters as
appropriate.


@subheading Other clarifications

Command names will always start with ASCII 92 backslash @code{\}
and be followed with letters (ASCII chars 65 to 90 inclusive and
97 to 122 inclusive).  Commands will be case-sensitive, but no
commands should differ by only capitaliztion.



@node GLISS 2 - note-name languages
@chapter GLISS 2 - note-name languages


@subheading Summary

Stay with the default Netherlands style of accidentals, stay with
the current set of octave ranges.

@subheading Motivation

Changing these would lead to too much confusion from users and
work on rewriting the docs.


@subsubheading Arguments in favor

@itemize
@item
if convert-ly can't handle this automatically, this would be a
compatibility nightmare.

@item
even if convert-ly is perfect, there will be tons of problems with
different versions of snippets (i.e. at a given point in time, LSR
might be running 2.16 with a-sharp ais, or 3.0 with a-sharp as).

@item
...

@end itemize


@subsubheading Arguments against

Most projects writing note names in text use something close to
english.ly:

@itemize
@item
ABC uses...

@item
musictex uses...

@item
(from private communication) composers discussing note-names in
emails use...

@item
Sibelius / Finale, if they ever discuss note-names in text, use...

@item
...

@end itemize



@node GLISS 3 - canonical file structure
@chapter GLISS 3 - canonical file structure

@subheading Summary

File structure means stuff like @code{\book}, @code{\score},
@code{\voice}.  This is probably the trickiest thing to stabilize;
we need to have enough info that

@subheading Details

@verbatim
@end verbatim



@bye

